CHAPTER 8: Documentation 355

**STORAGE AND RETENTION**

Health information technology is evolving
very fast with many storage and retention
options now available. Cloud computing is an
environment that can store large volumes of
data and facilitate the sharing of resources
and services over the internet rather than
having these services and resources on local
servers/nodes or personal devices. Cloud-
based storage options include data security,
privacy, and interoperability between
systems, with an increasing use of highly
secure technologies such as blockchain and
cryptographic methods for enhanced data
protection.18

Behavioral health organizations must
navigate a complex landscape of legal
requirements when it comes to the storage
and retention of electronic health records
(EHRs). They usually consult with legal
experts and IT professionals specializing in
healthcare to ensure full compliance with all
relevant laws and regulations.

Here are some key considerations:19

1.  **Compliance with HIPAA:** HIPAA sets
    the standard for protecting sensitive
    patient data. Behavioral health
    organizations must ensure that their
    EHR systems are HIPAA compliant. This involves implementing physical, network, and process security
    measures to protect electronic health information.

2.  **State Regulations:** Along with federal laws like HIPAA, each state may have its own regulations regarding
    the retention of protected health records. Organizations should be aware of the specific laws in the states
    where they operate.

3.  **Secure Storage Solutions:** EHRs must be stored in a secure environment. This can be on-premises
    servers or cloud-based solutions, but in either case, strong security measures must be in place to prevent
    unauthorized access or data breaches.

4.  **Data Encryption:** Encrypting data, both in transit and at rest, is a critical component of safeguarding
    electronic health records. Encryption makes it much harder for unauthorized individuals to access or
    interpret the data.

5.  **Access Controls:** Implementing strict access controls ensures that only authorized personnel can access
    or modify the EHRs. This often involves role-based access, where individuals only have access to the
    information necessary for their job functions.

6.  **Retention Policies:** Organizations must adhere to legal requirements for how long medical and behavioral
    health records must be kept. This varies depending on the type of record and the clientâ€™s age, among
    other factors.

[Image: A black and white, slightly stylized photograph of a server rack (a tall, narrow cabinet containing multiple computer servers) emerging from or surrounded by fluffy white clouds. The server rack is dark, and the clouds are bright, creating a contrast. The image likely symbolizes cloud computing or cloud storage.]